i almost never or actually never
tell you to watch an earlier video
before the one you're seeing right now
it's incredibly rare i think pretty much
all my videos work as
standalone statements on any given topic
even if
it's my 35th or 36th video on a given
topic any of my videos about veganism
any of my videos about quitting video
games in my videos about quitting
alcohol
i think they work as standalone videos
this video in particular philosophically
is a sequel to two seemingly
unrelated videos i'm following up on an
earlier video i made
about how to write nonfiction
and the advice given in that video it
applies equally
to how to compose a youtube monologue
how to do
the type of youtube content i do myself
not filmmaking with a bunch of actors in
a script particularly how to write an
essay
or how to do a video essay equally but
this is also a sequel
to an earlier video i had in which i
briefly discussed
what i called the golden age of
psychotherapy the golden age of
psychology
psychiatry the golden age of really the
kind of philosophy
of the mind before people tried to drag
those categories into the hard sciences
now they did that both because they want
to make money selling drugs
and because they want to professionalize
what they were doing and make more money
wearing a lab coat
than they could make if they dressed and
behaved and presented themselves like
socrates right what did socrates do
he stood around and asked people
questions about what it means to be a
man
what virtue is how to lead a meaningful
life
he didn't make a whole lot of money
doing that not even if you believe what
the comedians say who made fun of him
back in ancient athens because one of
some of the best sources we have on who
socrates really was
uh we get from the uh the comedians who
criticized and ridiculed him okay
but you can imagine just with that
comparison what a
different world we would live in if
people like
psychiatrists and therapists actively
consider themselves inheritors of the
socratic tradition
where they said okay we're going to sit
down and we're gonna philosophize
about why you make the decisions you
make in your life why you do the things
you do why you
feel the way you feel why you're having
the problems you're having
and you know what at the beginning and
end of the conversation
the therapist i'm going to openly
declare to you
that i do not know i'm going to ask you
questions
i'm going to say i don't know the
answers i am not going to come to a
scientific conclusion that your problem
is that you're depressed
you're bipolar et cetera et cetera i'm
not gonna i'm not gonna identify your
behavior
and then claim that my perception of
your behavior means that you correspond
to
a box a check mark in a book called the
dsm
that this is the condition you have and
then we're not going to pretend that
that's a medically real
condition we're going to actually engage
in socratic dialogue philosophically
about what your problems are with both
of us acknowledging
that we don't know the answers you as
the patient
you're you're here because you've got a
problem and you either don't know what
the solution is
or you don't fully understand the
problem yourself and me i'm just an
outside observer
who's asking some of those questions but
he doesn't presume now what a different
world
we would live in if what i'm calling the
golden age
of therapy had gone off in that
direction
and the most fundamental reason why it
didn't
is money you make more money wearing a
lab coat
without even getting into making money
selling drugs and so you can already see
this in sigmund freud in the earliest
stage of freudianism when by the way
they rejected
the use of drugs it's one of the
defining aspects of freud's
uh school of thought uh but already
the use of needless latin terminology
and pretending that we can give you a
specific diagnosis that's scientifically
real
so we already are on the downward spiral
from the earliest stage
of freud's career and the financial
incentive
to professionalize therapy it's already
very clear in
freud's life as a whole and then after
his death with the
inheritors who take over his foundations
and institutions okay
um the problem
with the golden age of therapy
the golden age of the philosophy of the
mind if you like
the problem was that any given analysis
reveals just as much about the analyst
as it does about the person being
analyzed
right now i have sat down with
therapists
if i sit there and tell them about the
story of how i first decided
to do research in cambodia how i first
started
learning the cambodian language how that
was tied to this other language
called pali and this literature and this
philosophy and humanitarian work and
politics
i can tell the whole story i'm a good
talker right it's not like i have some
kind of
psychological barrier to overcome in
telling that story
you tell me what's revealed by the
opinion of the analyst
the opinion of the therapist the opinion
of the psychiatrist whoever it is in
that professional role
i'm telling you pretty much all that we
reveal
is what their attitude is toward my
research
my decisions in life now some people
in that line of work might be so
unsympathetic
that they really regard those decisions
i made as as
signs of of some kind of profound
psychological problem
they'd say oh well this is greatly
irrational
obviously you had this emotional trauma
you were trying to overcome or you're
trying to overcompensate for something
they could diagnose this really like an
illness
and on the other hand you could have
someone in that role as a therapist
who is of an intellectual character or
cultural character
where they really understand and
appreciate why i was motivated to do
these things that
they really regard what i was doing as
something quite virtuous
they may even say i've had people in
that position they say
wow i wish i had more clients like you i
wish i had more people coming in to talk
about their lives
who led lives like you as opposed to
people coming in and telling me that
they're an alcoholic who cheats on their
wife and hates their job
you know they deal with a lot of
problems that are a lot less interesting
right you make it
very positive however
this tells me almost nothing about
myself and my problems now i'm not i'm
not a complete nihilist
on this i'm not claiming i'm not
claiming that absolutely nothing
can be revealed from the detached
perspective of someone else
analyzing my case analyzing my problems
in life analyzing my life story as such
but i'm making the sternest caution
imaginable against the assumption that
there is anything
objective about that outside
opinion it's just a different kind of
subjective judgment
that we're inviting into our lives right
now
for many people the presumption is that
the person in the therapist role
has some kind of um elite education
some kind of philosophical or scientific
education that
necessarily gives them a better insight
into into your
life than you could possibly have
yourself
about that claim i am tremendously
skeptical right now the strength and the
weakness
of this of this little puzzle i've
described to you
applies profoundly to the creative
writing
process when you write a story
and i mean the word story here in a way
that embraces
and includes writing a newspaper story
writing a non-fiction story
writing a book of history or politics
right all of these have elements
of story when you write a story
you are implicitly telling the reader
as much about yourself as you are about
the subject
of analysis okay you're telling us as
much about the analyst
as you are about the thing analyzed so
in the last episode where i was
discussing this
how to be a nonfiction writer one of the
things i emphasized was
don't summarize don't narrate
generalities ideally i would even go so
far as to say
don't express approval or disapproval
i think that's actually a very profound
misunderstanding about what creative
writing is all about especially creative
writing in
in non-fiction right when you're going
through
this research you've got this body of
facts you've got
the history of a given century let's say
the history of the 19th century in japan
or something
if you've written out a summary of your
research or some of these facts
there are going to be moments where you
yourself
say wow and sorry why are you saying wow
maybe you're saying wow because what
happened at this particular moment of
history
is the exact opposite of everything you
were taught to believe
growing up in school it was the opposite
of your own hypothesis when you started
doing the research
there is some reason why you say wow
looking at this particular issue this
particular
episode of history right but in
disclosing that
again you are telling the audience
just as much about yourself as you are
about the thing
being analyzed okay so
i grew up with all kinds of
misconceptions
one that i grew up with was the idea
very much given to me by my parents
given to me in book form
by books provided to my parents but also
even given to me in the school system
from newspaper articles from television
i was given
the assumption that communism started
off
with some kind of grand ideal but
gradually over time
became corrupt many people think this
way about the roman empire about all
kinds of things in history many people
think this way with the history of the
catholic church
that at the beginning it started with
some great deals but gradually
became corrupt when i was studying
the history of japan and the very first
years
of the russian revolution and russian
civil war period so 1917 to say
1924 or something like that in that
earliest
period i was shocked
i was shocked to see that the massacres
and the rape and the corruption and the
radical looting behavior like all of the
worst aspects of communism were present
not five years after the regime was
established
not even five weeks after the resume
which was right there from day
one all of these things were evident and
even some of the extravagances
of communism like creating a new theater
creating a new opera this kind of thing
i was in this small town
in the easternmost part of the soviet
union where they're at war with the
japanese the japanese are present it's
so far east in the soviet union
there's a mix of white and asian peoples
there in this story
in these bizarre circumstances you saw
okay now
you may think you may think this is
objectively interesting right
of course everything is subjectively
interesting right
why is that interesting why is that
shocking for someone else it wouldn't be
but for many other people they're going
to share my assumptions they're going to
respond soon
i as the analyst am inextricably part
of this analysis and for me that is the
story
that's the moment where you're going
through these facts you say wow
you know there's a story to tell here
now of course a particular book may have
many stories a particular youtube
channel may have many stories
but you should structure your writing
you should start your creative process
around
what is the story not around a summary
not a
narration of generalities not in my
opinion not even around a thesis
probably a different video to talk about
that that even the idea of a thesis can
be very misleading and counterproductive
uh for for a creative writer i think
that also relates to what i said earlier
that i don't think
approval and disapproval should be the
purpose of writing or recording a
youtube video
like that same episode of history it
becomes boring and banal
if your thesis is communism is bad
that's a weak way to write that
what's really strong is in to include
yourself to involve yourself
in the analysis you know to write
yourself into the story
where it's the reader can feel your
surprise your interests show they can
participate
in how you felt about this how amazed
you were in discovering this chapter of
history and why
what the implicit contrasts were right
so again the analyst is
is part of the analysis now in doing
this also you're disclosing your bias
in effect and then you get to limit your
bias and you get to challenge yourself
and say things that
you know or maybe 180 degrees opposite
of your own bias too
by disclosing your bias you get to you
get to challenge your bias okay
um here's the difference between
therapy and creative writing i'm really
talking about creative nonfiction
i suppose okay the difference is
if the story doesn't work you get to
change
who you are right
the same story i just told you
i can tell it again i can tell it again
from the perspective of a japanese
soldier living through that same period
of history
and i can talk about their assumptions
and their perspective on the history
and how shocked they were because when
they went to russia
this wasn't what they were expecting at
all right what about a japanese person
who was born in the 1860s
and who's then living through this
chapter of history and they grew up
with all of these myths and legends
about what the japanese empire was
supposed to be
and the japanese empires and turned out
the way they'd imagined it at all
right there they also had assumptions
about who what the russian empire was
and who the russians were
and now they're encountering the
unbelievable savagery cruelty
massacres rape and so on of the of the
soviet communists and they're having to
reevaluate
everything okay so you you get to change
in the act of writing
you can adopt two three four many
perspectives
you can find that moment in history
that's interesting
and if it's not interesting from your
perspective or if the story
can't really be told from your
perspective you can challenge yourself
to do the research and adopt another
perspective provisionally
whether that's for one chapter for one
youtube video or one book
and then see it that way now
i'll be honest with you i think in the
future
therapy has to become more like creative
writing
i think the therapist has to recognize
that what he or she is doing
is fundamentally much more like the
interpretation of literature
the creation and analysis of stories
than it is like anything that exists in
the sciences
and probably one of the healthiest
things you could possibly do
with a therapist i i'm not encouraging
any of you to waste your time or money
doing this but when a therapist tells
you
why did you leave behind your home in
canada
your family your career and education
prospects why did you leave behind this
wonderful life in canada
to go live in poverty and difficulty in
cambodia and try to do humanitarian work
and try to learn these others
you must be crazy and believe me you can
encounter attitudes that hostile
and worse why did you do these things my
girlfriend melissa
she she wanted to talk to a therapist
because her parents perceived her sudden
decision to move to china
as irrational or unreasonable or crazy
and they tried to get her into the
company of a therapist who would take
the same kind of unreasonable position
now you know hey whether it was so
ridiculous to move to china
you know it's another it's another
question i've worked out all right
if it's a 21st century why not why not
move to china and get a job in china
there's nothing wrong with that but her
parents were freaked out by it
and you if you're in if you find the
right therapist you find the wrong
therapist
they may also want to diagnose that
right
wouldn't it be different if you could
challenge your therapist
to say hey why don't you think through
how do you
how you would see this if you were
considering it
from someone else's perspective maybe
you as the therapist
maybe you are a wealthy
homosexual intellectual who got
interested in freudian psychoanalysis
and then went to study for this reason
that reason this is who you are this is
your story
so you can't appreciate this or you
regard it as really bizarre extreme
tell me something tell me something when
i got there to cambodia
how do you think the other people
working in the humanitarian industry
regarding it there were all these other
people who were employed by these
agencies and for whom this is normal
how do you think peasants who farm rice
and who grew up with that religion with
buddhism and so how do you think they
were going to be
do you think they thought it was so
weird that a white guy would want to
join their religion you know aren't
there some other perspectives here
couldn't we put on that hat could we put
on those glasses couldn't we try to
again
disclose our own bias and instead of
pretending
that we're going from darkness to light
that we're going from the unexamined
world of the desires
to scientific certainty about what it is
we do and why a diagnosis
right wouldn't it be better if we
recognize that we're going
from one kind of colored light to
another
that we're going from one kind of deeply
subjective
ultimately kind of literary analysis to
just another
subjective but contrasting literary
analysis